README.md, before:

# pago

> 🚧 **pago is in early [beta](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_release_life_cycle#Beta).**
> Expect bugs, security vulnerabilities, and potential data loss.

**pago** is a command-line password manager.
It provides the following in a single binary:
- [age](https://github.com/FiloSottile/age) public-key and password encryption
- Git version control of the password store ([go-git](https://github.com/go-git/go-git))
- A fuzzy finder similar to [fzf](https://github.com/junegunn/fzf) for choosing entries ([go-fuzzyfinder](https://github.com/ktr0731/go-fuzzyfinder))
- A multiline text editor for editing encrypted data without writing it to disk ([bubbles/textarea](https://github.com/charmbracelet/bubbles))

## Description

pago encrypts passwords with one or more public keys using [age](https://github.com/FiloSottile/age) (pronounced with a hard "g").
The public keys are called "recipients".
A private key matching one of the recipient public keys can decrypt the password.
The private keys are called "identities".
The file with the identities is encrypted with a password, also using age.

pago implements an agent like [ssh-agent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ssh-agent) or [gpg-agent](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/Invoking-GPG_002dAGENT.html).
The agent caches the identities.
This mean you don't have to enter the master password again during a session.
pago starts the agent the first time you enter the master password.
You can also start and stop the agent manually.

The pago password store format is compatible with [passage](https://github.com/FiloSottile/passage).
It has the following differences:

- The pago directory is located at `${XDG_DATA_HOME}/pago/`, while passage uses `~/.passage/`
- passage supports an encrypted or an unencrypted identities file; pago only supports encrypted

## Threat model

An attacker who gets ahold of your pago directory but not the master password should be unable to access the passwords stored in pago except by [brute-forcing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brute-force_attack) the master password.

## Motivation and alternatives

My primary password manager is [KeePassXC](https://github.com/keepassxreboot/keepassxc).
I use a secondary password manager to access a subset of secrets in cron jobs and scripts and on headless remote systems.

I used [`pass`](https://www.passwordstore.org/) for this for a time.
While I liked the design of `pass` and found it pleasant to use, I didn't like setting up GPG on a new system.
I went looking for a `pass` replacement based on age
because I had replaced GPG with age for encrypting files.
The following is the late-2024 shortlist of password managers I compiled before I decided to work on pago.
It includes explanations for why I didn't adopt them.

First, I needed the identities encrypted at rest and usable without reentering the password.
This ruled out [passage](https://github.com/FiloSottile/passage), which had no an agent, and [pa](https://github.com/biox/pa), which didn't support encryption for the identities file.
[kbs2](https://github.com/woodruffw/kbs2) didn't integrate with Git.
[seniorpw](https://gitlab.com/retirement-home/seniorpw) matched all of my criteria and was the closest to `pass`.
It is what I would most likely be using if I didn't decide to develop my own.

All of the above password managers are worth your attention.
For more options, see ["Awesome age"](https://github.com/FiloSottile/awesome-age).

## History

pago is a heavily modified fork of [pash](https://github.com/dylanaraps/pash) (archived).
It has been ported from POSIX shell to Tcl to Go and from [GPG](https://gnupg.org/) to age.

## Installation

You will need Go 1.22 or later to install pago.
Once Go is installed on your system, run the following commands:

```shell
# pago and pago-agent are two separate binaries.
# You should install both unless you have a specific reason not to.
go install dbohdan.com/pago/cmd/...@latest
```

Shell completion files for Bash and fish are available in [`completions/`](completions/).
To install completions for fish, clone the repository and run `install.fish`.

You may need to allow pago-agent to [**lock enough memory**](#memory-locking).

## Supported platforms

- pago is used by the developer on Linux, NetBSD, and rarely) OpenBSD.
- pago is automatically tested on FreeBSD and macOS.
- pago does not build on Windows.

The pago agent and test suite don't work on Windows.
Instead of offering a partial and untested Windows build, the project doesn't support Windows.
Windows users interested in pago are encouraged to try it in [WSL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Subsystem_for_Linux).

## Usage

### Initialize the password store

```shell
pago init
```

This will create a new password store, prompt you for a master password, and commit the recipients file to Git.

### Add passwords

```shell
# Either generate or input a password.
pago add foo/bar

# Generate a random password.
pago add -r foo/bar

# Specify a custom length and character pattern (regular expression).
pago add -l 32 -p '[A-Za-z0-9#$%]' foo/bar

# Input your own password.
pago add -i foo/bar

# Read a multiline secret.
age-keygen | pago add -m foo/bar
```

Adding a password creates a Git commit by default.

### Access passwords

```shell
# Show a password.
pago show foo/bar

# Copy to clipboard (clears after 30 seconds).
pago clip foo/bar

# Copy with a custom timeout (in seconds; 0 to disable).
pago clip -t 20 foo/bar

# List all entries organized in a tree.
pago show

# List entires with a name that matches a regular expression.
pago find fo

# Select an entry interactively using a fuzzy finder.
pago show --pick

# The same as `pago show --pick foo`. Starts the search with `foo`.
pago pick foo
```

### Edit passwords

```shell
# Edit a password that already exists.
pago edit foo/bar

# Create a password if it doesn't exist.
pago edit foo/new -f
```

### Generate passwords

```shell
# Generate a password without saving it.
pago generate

# Customize the length and pattern.
pago generate --length 16 --pattern '[a-z0-9]'
```

### Delete passwords

```shell
# Delete with confirmation.
pago delete foo/bar

# Force delete without confirmation.
pago delete -f foo/bar

# Pick what password to delete using a fuzzy finder.
pago delete -p foo/bar
```

By default, this will commit the deletion to Git.

### Rename passwords

```shell
# Rename an entry.
pago rename foo/bar foo/baz

# Move an entry to a new directory.
pago rename foo/baz qux/quux
```

This creates a Git commit by default.

### Agent

The agent keeps your identities in memory to avoid repeated password prompts.

```shell
# Start the agent automatically when needed.
pago show foo/bar

# Start manually.
pago agent start

# By default, the agent locks its memory to prevent secrets from being written to swap.
# You may need to run the command `ulimit -l 100000` to let it lock enough memory.
# Alternatively, you can disable memory locking
# with the environment variable `PAGO_MEMLOCK=0` or the flag `--no-memlock`.
pago agent start --no-memlock

# Run without an agent.
pago -s '' show foo/bar

# Shut down.
pago agent stop
```

### Memory locking

pago-agent defaults to [locking the process memory](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/mlock.html) to prevent secrets from being written to swap.
Secrets can be recovered from unencrypted swap that was not erased at system shutdown.

pago-agent uses up to 100 MiB of memory on systems where it has been tested.
Most operating systems don't allow a process to lock this much memory by default.
Additionally, on Free/Net/OpenBSD, the agent apparently needs the limit on locked memory to exceed its virtual memory even though only around 100 MiB is reserved.
This limit can be over 1 GiB.
(You don't lose 1 GiB of memory.)
Configure your system to allow this or set the environment variable `PAGO_MEMLOCK=0` to disable locking.

Here is how to allow users to lock more memory on different operating systems.
In these examples, we set the limit to 8 GiB.

#### Linux (systemd)

1. Create `/etc/systemd/system.conf.d/` if it doesn't exist.
2. Edit `/etc/systemd/system.conf.d/limits.conf` to contain the following:

```ini
[Manager]
DefaultLimitMEMLOCK=8G
```

3. Restart your user session.

#### Linux (other init systems)

1. Edit `/etc/security/limits.conf` and add this line:

```none
* hard memlock 8589934592
```

2. Restart your user session.

#### Free/Net/OpenBSD

1. Edit `/etc/login.conf` and update the default value of `memorylocked`:

```
default:\
	[...]
	:memorylocked=8G:\
	[...]
```

2. On FreeBSD only, run the following command as root:

```shell
cap_mkdb /etc/login.conf
```

3. Restart your user session.

### Environment variables

- `PAGO_AGENT`:
  The agent executable
- `PAGO_CLIP`:
  The command to use to copy the password to the clipboard.
  The default differs by platform:
    - Linux and BSD: `xclip -in -selection clip`
    - macOS: `copy`
- `PAGO_CONFIRM`:
  Whether pago should ask yes-no questions.
  `0` means pago will assume "yes".
- `PAGO_DIR`:
  The pago data directory location.
  Defaults to:
    - Linux and BSD: `~/.local/share/pago`
    - macOS: `~/Library/Application Support/pago`
- `PAGO_GIT`:
  Whether to use Git
- `PAGO_LENGTH`:
  The default length of random passwords
- `PAGO_MEMLOCK`:
  Whether the agent should lock its memory using [mlockall(2)](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/functions/mlockall.html) to prevent secrets from being written to swap.
  `0` to disable.
- `PAGO_PATTERN`:
  The default character pattern (regular expression) for random passwords
- `PAGO_SOCK`:
  The agent socket path.
  Defaults to a path inside the user runtime directory.
  This is `${XDG_RUNTIME_DIR}/pago/socket` or `/run/user/<UID>/pago/socket` on Linux.
  If the primary runtime directory is not available, pago tries `/var/run/user/<UID>/` as a fallback.
  If that also fails, it uses a user-specific subdirectory in the temporary directory, for example, `/tmp/pago-${USER}/socket`.
- `PAGO_TIMEOUT`:
  The default timeout to clear the clipboard

### Interactive editor

The editor for the `edit` command editor includes the default [bubbles/textarea key bindings](https://github.com/charmbracelet/bubbles/blob/8624776d4572078ae6ff098d454c719047f9eb83/textarea/textarea.go#L71).

#### Session

- **Ctrl+D**: Save and exit
- **Esc**/**Ctrl+C**: Exit without saving

#### Navigation

- **←**/**Ctrl+B**: Move cursor left by one character
- **→**/**Ctrl+F**: Move cursor right by one character
- **Alt+←**/**Alt+B**: Move cursor left by one word
- **Alt+→**/**Alt+F**: Move cursor right by one word
- **↑**/**Ctrl+P**: Move cursor up a line
- **↓**/**Ctrl+N**: Move cursor down a line
- **Home**/**Ctrl+A**: Move to line start
- **End**/**Ctrl+E**: Move to line end
- **Alt+<**/**Ctrl+Home**: Move to beginning of input
- **Alt+>**/**Ctrl+End**: Move to end of input

#### Editing

- **Backspace**/**Ctrl+H**: Delete character before cursor
- **Delete**/**Ctrl+D**: Delete character after cursor
- **Alt+Backspace**/**Ctrl+W**: Delete word before cursor
- **Alt+Delete**/**Alt+D**: Delete word after cursor
- **Ctrl+K**: Delete all text after cursor
- **Ctrl+U**: Delete all text before cursor
- **Enter**/**Ctrl+M**: Insert newline
- **Ctrl+V**: Paste from clipboard

#### Text transformation

- **Alt+C**: Capitalize word forward
- **Alt+L**: Lowercase word forward
- **Alt+U**: Uppercase word forward
- **Ctrl+T**: Transpose characters at cursor

## License

MIT.
See the file [`LICENSE`](LICENSE).

Commit message:

feat(config): use our own algo to find runtime dir

README.md, after:

# pago

> 🚧 **pago is in early [beta](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_release_life_cycle#Beta).**
> Expect bugs, security vulnerabilities, and potential data loss.

**pago** is a command-line password manager.
It provides the following in a single binary:
- [age](https://github.com/FiloSottile/age) public-key and password encryption
- Git version control of the password store ([go-git](https://github.com/go-git/go-git))
- A fuzzy finder similar to [fzf](https://github.com/junegunn/fzf) for choosing entries ([go-fuzzyfinder](https://github.com/ktr0731/go-fuzzyfinder))
- A multiline text editor for editing encrypted data without writing it to disk ([bubbles/textarea](https://github.com/charmbracelet/bubbles))

## Description

pago encrypts passwords with one or more public keys using [age](https://github.com/FiloSottile/age) (pronounced with a hard "g").
The public keys are called "recipients".
A private key matching one of the recipient public keys can decrypt the password.
The private keys are called "identities".
The file with the identities is encrypted with a password, also using age.

pago implements an agent like [ssh-agent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ssh-agent) or [gpg-agent](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/Invoking-GPG_002dAGENT.html).
The agent caches the identities.
This mean you don't have to enter the master password again during a session.
pago starts the agent the first time you enter the master password.
You can also start and stop the agent manually.

The pago password store format is compatible with [passage](https://github.com/FiloSottile/passage).
It has the following differences:

- The pago directory is located at `${XDG_DATA_HOME}/pago/`, while passage uses `~/.passage/`
- passage supports an encrypted or an unencrypted identities file; pago only supports encrypted

## Threat model

An attacker who gets ahold of your pago directory but not the master password should be unable to access the passwords stored in pago except by [brute-forcing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brute-force_attack) the master password.

## Motivation and alternatives

My primary password manager is [KeePassXC](https://github.com/keepassxreboot/keepassxc).
I use a secondary password manager to access a subset of secrets in cron jobs and scripts and on headless remote systems.

I used [`pass`](https://www.passwordstore.org/) for this for a time.
While I liked the design of `pass` and found it pleasant to use, I didn't like setting up GPG on a new system.
I went looking for a `pass` replacement based on age
because I had replaced GPG with age for encrypting files.
The following is the late-2024 shortlist of password managers I compiled before I decided to work on pago.
It includes explanations for why I didn't adopt them.

First, I needed the identities encrypted at rest and usable without reentering the password.
This ruled out [passage](https://github.com/FiloSottile/passage), which had no an agent, and [pa](https://github.com/biox/pa), which didn't support encryption for the identities file.
[kbs2](https://github.com/woodruffw/kbs2) didn't integrate with Git.
[seniorpw](https://gitlab.com/retirement-home/seniorpw) matched all of my criteria and was the closest to `pass`.
It is what I would most likely be using if I didn't decide to develop my own.

All of the above password managers are worth your attention.
For more options, see ["Awesome age"](https://github.com/FiloSottile/awesome-age).

## History

pago is a heavily modified fork of [pash](https://github.com/dylanaraps/pash) (archived).
It has been ported from POSIX shell to Tcl to Go and from [GPG](https://gnupg.org/) to age.

## Installation

You will need Go 1.22 or later to install pago.
Once Go is installed on your system, run the following commands:

```shell
# pago and pago-agent are two separate binaries.
# You should install both unless you have a specific reason not to.
go install dbohdan.com/pago/cmd/...@latest
```

Shell completion files for Bash and fish are available in [`completions/`](completions/).
To install completions for fish, clone the repository and run `install.fish`.

You may need to allow pago-agent to [**lock enough memory**](#memory-locking).

## Supported platforms

- pago is used by the developer on Linux, NetBSD, and rarely) OpenBSD.
- pago is automatically tested on FreeBSD and macOS.
- pago does not build on Windows.

The pago agent and test suite don't work on Windows.
Instead of offering a partial and untested Windows build, the project doesn't support Windows.
Windows users interested in pago are encouraged to try it in [WSL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Subsystem_for_Linux).

## Usage

### Initialize the password store

```shell
pago init
```

This will create a new password store, prompt you for a master password, and commit the recipients file to Git.

### Add passwords

```shell
# Either generate or input a password.
pago add foo/bar

# Generate a random password.
pago add -r foo/bar

# Specify a custom length and character pattern (regular expression).
pago add -l 32 -p '[A-Za-z0-9#$%]' foo/bar

# Input your own password.
pago add -i foo/bar

# Read a multiline secret.
age-keygen | pago add -m foo/bar
```

Adding a password creates a Git commit by default.

### Access passwords

```shell
# Show a password.
pago show foo/bar

# Copy to clipboard (clears after 30 seconds).
pago clip foo/bar

# Copy with a custom timeout (in seconds; 0 to disable).
pago clip -t 20 foo/bar

# List all entries organized in a tree.
pago show

# List entires with a name that matches a regular expression.
pago find fo

# Select an entry interactively using a fuzzy finder.
pago show --pick

# The same as `pago show --pick foo`. Starts the search with `foo`.
pago pick foo
```

### Edit passwords

```shell
# Edit a password that already exists.
pago edit foo/bar

# Create a password if it doesn't exist.
pago edit foo/new -f
```

### Generate passwords

```shell
# Generate a password without saving it.
pago generate

# Customize the length and pattern.
pago generate --length 16 --pattern '[a-z0-9]'
```

### Delete passwords

```shell
# Delete with confirmation.
pago delete foo/bar

# Force delete without confirmation.
pago delete -f foo/bar

# Pick what password to delete using a fuzzy finder.
pago delete -p foo/bar
```

By default, this will commit the deletion to Git.

### Rename passwords

```shell
# Rename an entry.
pago rename foo/bar foo/baz

# Move an entry to a new directory.
pago rename foo/baz qux/quux
```

This creates a Git commit by default.

### Agent

The agent keeps your identities in memory to avoid repeated password prompts.

```shell
# Start the agent automatically when needed.
pago show foo/bar

# Start manually.
pago agent start

# By default, the agent locks its memory to prevent secrets from being written to swap.
# You may need to run the command `ulimit -l 100000` to let it lock enough memory.
# Alternatively, you can disable memory locking
# with the environment variable `PAGO_MEMLOCK=0` or the flag `--no-memlock`.
pago agent start --no-memlock

# Run without an agent.
pago -s '' show foo/bar

# Shut down.
pago agent stop
```

### Memory locking

pago-agent defaults to [locking the process memory](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/mlock.html) to prevent secrets from being written to swap.
Secrets can be recovered from unencrypted swap that was not erased at system shutdown.

pago-agent uses up to 100 MiB of memory on systems where it has been tested.
Most operating systems don't allow a process to lock this much memory by default.
Additionally, on Free/Net/OpenBSD, the agent apparently needs the limit on locked memory to exceed its virtual memory even though only around 100 MiB is reserved.
This limit can be over 1 GiB.
(You don't lose 1 GiB of memory.)
Configure your system to allow this or set the environment variable `PAGO_MEMLOCK=0` to disable locking.

Here is how to allow users to lock more memory on different operating systems.
In these examples, we set the limit to 8 GiB.

#### Linux (systemd)

1. Create `/etc/systemd/system.conf.d/` if it doesn't exist.
2. Edit `/etc/systemd/system.conf.d/limits.conf` to contain the following:

```ini
[Manager]
DefaultLimitMEMLOCK=8G
```

3. Restart your user session.

#### Linux (other init systems)

1. Edit `/etc/security/limits.conf` and add this line:

```none
* hard memlock 8589934592
```

2. Restart your user session.

#### Free/Net/OpenBSD

1. Edit `/etc/login.conf` and update the default value of `memorylocked`:

```
default:\
	[...]
	:memorylocked=8G:\
	[...]
```

2. On FreeBSD only, run the following command as root:

```shell
cap_mkdb /etc/login.conf
```

3. Restart your user session.

### Environment variables

- `PAGO_AGENT`:
  The agent executable
- `PAGO_CLIP`:
  The command to use to copy the password to the clipboard.
  The default differs by platform:
    - Linux and BSD: `xclip -in -selection clip`
    - macOS: `copy`
- `PAGO_CONFIRM`:
  Whether pago should ask yes-no questions.
  `0` means pago will assume "yes".
- `PAGO_DIR`:
  The pago data directory location.
  Defaults to:
    - Linux and BSD: `~/.local/share/pago`
    - macOS: `~/Library/Application Support/pago`
- `PAGO_GIT`:
  Whether to use Git
- `PAGO_LENGTH`:
  The default length of random passwords
- `PAGO_MEMLOCK`:
  Whether the agent should lock its memory using [mlockall(2)](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/functions/mlockall.html) to prevent secrets from being written to swap.
  `0` to disable.
- `PAGO_PATTERN`:
  The default character pattern (regular expression) for random passwords
- `PAGO_SOCK`:
  The agent socket path.
  The default path is determined by trying candidate paths until the parent directory of the pago directory exists.
    - Linux and BSD:
      - `${XDG_RUNTIME_DIR}/pago/socket`
      - `/var/run/xdg/$USER/pago/socket` on FreeBSD only
      - `/run/user/$UID/pago/socket`
      - `/var/run/user/$UID/pago/socket`
      - `${TMPDIR:-/tmp}/pago-${USER}/socket`
    - macOS:
      - `${TMPDIR:-/tmp}/pago-${USER}/socket`
- `PAGO_TIMEOUT`:
  The default timeout to clear the clipboard

### Interactive editor

The editor for the `edit` command editor includes the default [bubbles/textarea key bindings](https://github.com/charmbracelet/bubbles/blob/8624776d4572078ae6ff098d454c719047f9eb83/textarea/textarea.go#L71).

#### Session

- **Ctrl+D**: Save and exit
- **Esc**/**Ctrl+C**: Exit without saving

#### Navigation

- **←**/**Ctrl+B**: Move cursor left by one character
- **→**/**Ctrl+F**: Move cursor right by one character
- **Alt+←**/**Alt+B**: Move cursor left by one word
- **Alt+→**/**Alt+F**: Move cursor right by one word
- **↑**/**Ctrl+P**: Move cursor up a line
- **↓**/**Ctrl+N**: Move cursor down a line
- **Home**/**Ctrl+A**: Move to line start
- **End**/**Ctrl+E**: Move to line end
- **Alt+<**/**Ctrl+Home**: Move to beginning of input
- **Alt+>**/**Ctrl+End**: Move to end of input

#### Editing

- **Backspace**/**Ctrl+H**: Delete character before cursor
- **Delete**/**Ctrl+D**: Delete character after cursor
- **Alt+Backspace**/**Ctrl+W**: Delete word before cursor
- **Alt+Delete**/**Alt+D**: Delete word after cursor
- **Ctrl+K**: Delete all text after cursor
- **Ctrl+U**: Delete all text before cursor
- **Enter**/**Ctrl+M**: Insert newline
- **Ctrl+V**: Paste from clipboard

#### Text transformation

- **Alt+C**: Capitalize word forward
- **Alt+L**: Lowercase word forward
- **Alt+U**: Uppercase word forward
- **Ctrl+T**: Transpose characters at cursor

## License

MIT.
See the file [`LICENSE`](LICENSE).
